---
subject: "History NCERT"
class: 6
chapter: 8
title: "Ashoka, The Emperor Who Gave Up War"
---

## Level 01 | Moderate

### Q1. What was name of Ashoka's grandfather?
- (a) Krishna
- (b) Mahavira
- (c) Siddhartha
- **(d) Chandragupta Maurya** ✓
> **Explanation:** The empire that Ashoka ruled was founded by his grandfather, Chandragupta Maurya, more than 2,300 years ago. Chandragupta was supported by a wise man named Chanakya or Kautilya. Many of Chanakya's ideas were written down in a book called, Arthashastra.

### Q2. What was the capital of the Mauryan Empire?
- **(a) Pataliputra** ✓
- (b) Vaishali
- (c) Indraprastha
- (d) Kushinagar
> **Explanation:** Pataliputra was the capital of the Mauryan Empire. The monarch ruled the empire from the capital.

### Q3. Chandragupta Maurya established the Mauryan Empire by defeating the:
- **(a) Nandas** ✓
- (b) Chalukyas
- (c) Pallavas
- (d) Shunga
> **Explanation:** Chandragupta Maurya established the Mauryan Empire by defeating the Nandas. Chandragupta Maurya ascended the throne at the age of 25. He defeated the last Nanda ruler Dhanananda and occupied Pataliputra in 322 BC. Chandragupta Maurya was supported by a wise man named Chanakya/Kautilya.

### Q4. From whom did the Mauryas collect taxes?
- (a) Hunters
- (b) Farmers
- (c) Craftsmen
- **(d) All of these** ✓
> **Explanation:** As the Mauryan Empire was so large, its different parts were ruled differently. The area around Pataliputra was under the direct control of the emperor. This meant that officials were appointed to collect taxes from farmers, herders, craftspersons and traders, who lived in villages and towns in the area.

### Q5. Which are the animals shown in our national Emblem?
- (a) Goats
- **(b) Lions** ✓
- (c) Dog
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** The state emblem is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Ashoka. In the original, there are four lions, standing back to back, mounted on an abacus with a frieze carrying sculptures in high relief of an elephant, a galloping horse, a bull and a lion separated by intervening wheels over a bell-shaped lotus.

### Q6. When members of same family become rulers one after another, the family is called a ___
- (a) Empire
- (b) Government
- **(c) Dynasty** ✓
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** When members of the same family become rulers one after another, the family is often called a dynasty. The Mauryas were a dynasty with three important rulers—Chandragupta, his son Bindusara and Bindusara's son, Ashoka.

### Q7. Chandragupta Maurya was an ardent follower of
- (a) Sikhism
- **(b) Jainism** ✓
- (c) Buddhism
- (d) Hinduism
> **Explanation:** Chandragupta Maurya was the founder of the Mauryan dynasty. He defeated the mighty Magadha emperor Dhanananda of the Nanda Dynasty. After retiring from the throne, he became a Jain monk. Acharya Bhadrabahu, the most influential Jain ascetic at that time, was Chandragupta's spiritual teacher. In the last days of their life, Acharya Badrabahu and Chandragupta Maurya, both adopted Sallekhana, a Jain way of death by starvation.

### Q8. Kautilya's Arthashastra deals with the aspects of:
- (a) Economic life
- (b) Religious life
- (c) Social life
- **(d) Political policies** ✓
> **Explanation:** Kautilya's Arthashastra is the most important work on public Administration in ancient India. It deals with different aspects of management which include strategic management, financial management, accounting, human resource management, corporate governance, social responsibility, etc.

### Q9. The duty of Dhamma Mahamatta was ___
- **(a) To teach people about dhamma, by visiting different places.** ✓
- (b) To collect taxes.
- (c) To punish the people who violated rules.
- (d) To award the people who are gentle.
> **Explanation:** Dhamma Mahamattas were special officers appointed by Emperor Ashoka in order to spread and enforce the principles of dhamma. Dhamma is a Prakrit word, which is derived from the Sanskrit word 'dharma' meaning religious duty. Dhamma did not involve worship of Gods or the performance of sacrifices. Instead, Dhamma was a code of conduct and morals such as charity, kindness, benevolence and tolerance, to be followed.

### Q10. A sculpture of a polished stone bull which was found in Rampurva (Bihar) is now placed:
- (a) In Parliament House
- (b) In front of the share market office at Mumbai
- **(c) In Rashtrapati Bhawan** ✓
- (d) In the PMO office
> **Explanation:** Original bull capital of Rampurva, one of the Pillars of Ashoka, is now located in the Presidential Palace of Rashtrapati Bhavan, New Delhi.

## Level 02 | Advanced

### Q1. Who founded the Maurya Empire in 322 BCE?
- (a) Bindusara
- (b) Bimbisara
- (c) Ashoka
- **(d) Chandragupta Maurya** ✓
> **Explanation:** Chandragupta Maurya was the founder of the Maurya Empire, more than 2,300 years ago. Chandragupta was supported by a wise man called Chanakya or Kautilya.

### Q2. Which of the following correctly represents the chronological order of three important rulers of the Mauryan dynasty?
- (a) Chandragupta, Ashoka, Bindusara
- (b) Ashoka, Bindusara, Chandragupta
- **(c) Chandragupta, Bindusara, Ashoka** ✓
- (d) Bindusara, Chandragupta, Ashoka
> **Explanation:** Chandragupta's origins are shrouded in mystery. The Greek sources mention him to be of non-warrior lineage. The Hindu sources also say he was a student of Kautilya of humble birth (probably born to a Shudra woman). Most Buddhist sources say he was a Kshatriya. The Mauryas were a dynasty with three important rulers—Chandragupta, his son Bindusara and Bindusara's son, Ashoka.

### Q3. Consider the following statements:
1. Chandragupta Maurya was helped by a wise man named Chanakya. His ideas and teachings were written down in the famous book named, Arthashastra.
2. The realm that Ashoka administered was established by his grandfather, Chandragupta Maurya, over 1,500 years prior.
3. Emperors need more resources than kingdoms because empires are larger than kingdoms.

Select the correct answer with the code given below:
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- **(c) 1 and 3 only** ✓
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
> **Explanation:** Ashoka was one of the greatest rulers of history. The Mauryan-empire was founded by his grandfather, Chandragupta Maurya in 322 BCE. He was supported by a wise man named Chanakya or Kautilya. Chanakya's ideas were written down in the Arthashastra. Hence, Statement 1 is correct but Statement 2 is not correct. Emperors need more resources than kings as they are larger than kingdoms. They need to be protected by big armies and they also need a larger number of officials who collect taxes. Hence, Statement 3 is correct.

### Q4. Consider the following places:
1. Kandahar
2. Brahmagiri
3. Jaugada
4. Girnar
5. Lumbini

In how many of the above places were the inscriptions of Ashoka found?
- (a) Only two
- (b) Only three
- (c) Only four
- **(d) All five** ✓
> **Explanation:** Ashokan inscriptions have been found in Kandahar, Lampaka, Mansehra, Shahbazgarhi, Kalsi, Topra, Meerut, Bahapur (Delhi), Lumbini, Rampurwa, Lauriya Araraj, Gujarra, Sarnath, Kaushambi, Rupnath, Sanchi, Panguraria, Girnar, Jaugada (Kalinga), Sopara, Sannathi, Maski, Yerragudi and Brahmagiri.

### Q5. Consider the following statements regarding Ashoka: A unique ruler:
1. He was the most famous Mauryan ruler.
2. He was the first ruler who tried to take his message to the people through inscriptions.
3. Most of Ashoka's inscriptions were written in Sanskrit and Pali languages.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- **(c) Both 1 and 2** ✓
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Ashoka was the most famous Mauryan ruler. He was the first ruler who tried to take his message to the people through inscriptions. Most of Ashoka's inscriptions were in Prakrit and were written in the Brahmi script. Hence, Statement 1 is correct but Statement 2 is not correct.

### Q6. In the context of the Mauryan Administration, consider the following statements:
1. Royal princes were often sent as governors in the provinces.
2. In the area under the direct control of the emperor, the officials were appointed to collect taxes.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- **(c) Both 1 and 2** ✓
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Although there was some amount of control from Pataliputra and royal princes were often sent as governors, local customs and rules were probably followed. The area around Pataliputra was under the direct control of the emperor. This meant that officials were appointed to collect taxes from farmers, herders, craftspersons and traders, who lived in villages and towns in the area. Officials also punished those who disobeyed the ruler's orders. Many of these officials were given salaries.

### Q7. What was the name of the ambassador, sent to the court of Chandragupta by the Greek ruler of West Asia, Seleucus Nicator?
- **(a) Megasthenes** ✓
- (b) Damascus
- (c) Fa Hien
- (d) Hsuan Tsang
> **Explanation:** Megasthenes was an ambassador who was sent to the court of Chandragupta by the Greek ruler of West Asia named Seleucus Nicator. Megasthenes was an ancient Greek historian, diplomat and Indian ethnographer and explorer in the Hellenistic period. He described India in his book Indica, which is now lost, but has been partially reconstructed from literary fragments found in later authors that quoted his work.

### Q8. In the context of the Mauryan Empire, consider the following statements:
1. Ujjain lay en route from north to west India.
2. Areas of modern Pakistan and Afghanistan were included under the Mauryan Empire.
3. Many of Chandragupta's ideas were compiled in a book called the Arthashastra.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 and 2
- **(d) 1, 2 and 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** Statement 1 is incorrect because Ujjain lay en route from north to south India. Statement 3 is incorrect because many of Chanakya's ideas were written down in a book called the Arthashastra. Chanakya was a supporter of Chandragupta.

### Q9. Horrified by the loss of life, violence and bloodshed in the Kalinga war, Ashoka decided to observe 'Dhamma' and to teach others about it as well. In the context of Dhamma, consider the following statements:
1. Ashoka believed that winning people over through dhamma is much better than conquering them through force.
2. He wanted his sons and grandson to not indulge in wars after him. Instead, he wanted them to contribute in spreading Dhamma.

Which of the above statements is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- **(c) Both of these** ✓
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** Both of these above statements are correct. The Kalinga war brought about a change in Ashoka's attitude towards war. One of his inscriptions says, "I believe that winning people over through dhamma is much better than conquering them through force. I am imparting this message for the future, so that my son and grandson after me should not think about war. Instead, they should try to think about how to spread dhamma". 'Dhamma' is the Prakrit word for the Sanskrit term 'Dharma'.

### Q10. Megasthenes wrote an account on the basis of what he saw. In the context of the description of the emperor, consider the following statements:
1. The occasions on which the emperor appears in public was celebrated with grand royal processions.
2. His guards rode elephants decorated with gold and silver. Some of the guards carried trees.
3. The king was normally surrounded by armed women.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 3 only
- **(d) 1, 2 and 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** All the above statements are correct. Megasthenes wrote an account about what he saw. Here is a part of his description: The occasions on which the emperor appears in public are celebrated with grand royal processions. He is carried in a golden palanquin. His guards ride elephants decorated with gold and silver. Some of the guards carry trees on which live birds, including a flock of trained parrots, circle about the head of the emperor. The king is normally surrounded by armed women. He is afraid that someone may try to kill him.

## Level 03 | Previous Years

### Q1. Who among the following rulers advised his subjects through this inscription? [UPSC]
"Whosoever praises his religious sect or blames other sects out of excessive devotion to his own sect, with the view of glorifying his own sect, rather injures his own sect very severely."
- **(a) Ashoka** ✓
- (b) Samudragupta
- (c) Harshavardhana
- (d) Krishnadeva Raya
> **Explanation:** Ashoka has been credited with the propagation of the tenets of the Buddhist sect. Ashoka's dhamma (way of life) did not involve any worship to God or sacrifices and he thought that his duty towards his subjects was like that of a father towards his son. Ashoka's edicts and inscriptions contained instructions on religious matters, especially Buddhism and rules for the conduct of Bhikshuks.

### Q2. The last battle fought and won by king Ashoka was [ALLAHABAD HIGH COURT RO]
- (a) Battle of Panipat
- **(b) Kalinga war** ✓
- (c) Pannar war
- (d) Buxar war
> **Explanation:** The last battle fought and won by king Ashoka was the Kalinga War. The Kalinga War was fought in ancient India between the Maurya Empire under Ashoka and the state of Kalinga, an independent feudal kingdom located on the east coast, in the present-day state of Odisha and northern parts of Andhra Pradesh. It is presumed that the battle was fought on Dhauli hills in Dhauli, which is situated on the banks of the Daya River.

### Q3. Megasthenes was the ambassador of: [BPSC]
- **(a) Seleucus** ✓
- (b) Alexander
- (c) Darius
- (d) The Greeks
> **Explanation:** Megasthenes was the ambassador of Seleucus Nicator.

### Q4. Who dethroned the Mauryan dynasty? [RRB]
- (a) Pulakeshin II
- (b) Jai Singh
- (c) Vikramaditya
- **(d) Pushyamitra Sunga** ✓
> **Explanation:** Pushyamitra Shunga was the founder and first ruler of the Shunga Empire which he established against the Maurya Empire. Pushyamitra is recorded to have performed numerous Ashvamedha campaigns to legitimise his right to rule.

### Q5. Consider the following statements regarding the inscription of the Ashokan period and choose the correct options from the alternatives given below: [UPSC]
1. The inscription was constructed to convey message directly to the people.
2. The inscription was installed on the highways of that time.
3. The inscription used only Prakrit language so that common people could understand the royal message.

- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- **(d) 1, 2 and 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** They throw light on the career of Ashoka, his external and domestic policies and the extent of his empire. He is the first Indian king to speak directly to the people through his inscriptions. Hence, Statement 1 is correct. The history of Ashoka on can be reconstructed on the basis of his inscriptions. They are found not only in the Indian subcontinent but also in Kandahar in Afghanistan. Hence, Statement 2 is correct. The inscriptions were composed in Prakrit language and written in the Brahmi script throughout the greater part of the empire. But in the north-western part, they appear in Kharosthi script and in Kandahar in Afghanistan they were written even in Aramaic, in Greek script and Greek language. Hence, Statement 3 is not correct.

### Q6. Who was the first European scholar to decipher Ashokan inscriptions of the Mauryan period?
- **(a) James Prinsep** ✓
- (b) Max Mueller
- (c) Rousseau
- (d) William Jones
> **Explanation:** During the colonial period, many English scholars were interested in Indian inscriptions to explore the cultural heritage of India. James Prinsep was one of them; he was the first European scholar to decipher the Ashokan inscriptions of the Mauryan period.

### Q7. Which of the following sources indicate that the last Mauryan ruler Brihadrath was assassinated by Pushyamitra?
- (a) Inscriptions
- (b) Puranas
- (c) Gargi Samhita
- **(d) Harshacharita** ✓
> **Explanation:** Harshacharita indicates that the last Mauryan ruler Brihadrath was assassinated by Pushyamitra. Brihadrath He was the last ruler of the Mauryan Empire. He was killed in 185 BC and by his General-Pushyamitra Shunga. Pushyamitra Shunga took over the throne and established the Shunga Empire.
