---
subject: "History NCERT"
class: 6
chapter: 9
title: "Vital Villages, Thriving Towns"
---

## Level 01 | Moderate

### Q1. How many years ago did the use of iron begin in the subcontinent?
- **(a) Around 3,000 years ago** ✓
- (b) Around 6,000 years ago
- (c) Around 9,000 years ago
- (d) Around 12,000 years ago
> **Explanation:** The use of iron began in the subcontinent around 3,000 years ago. Some of the largest collections of iron tools and weapons were found in the megalithic burials.

### Q2. Among the following, what was the method of irrigation during the ancient times?
- (a) Canals
- (b) Wells
- (c) Tanks
- **(d) All of these** ✓
> **Explanation:** The kings and kingdoms could not have existed without the support of flourishing villages. While new tools and the system of transplantation increased production, irrigation was also used. Irrigation works that were built during this time included canals, wells, tanks and artificial lakes.

### Q3. Who was known as grama bhojaka in the northern part of ancient India?
- **(a) A village head man** ✓
- (b) An ordinary villager
- (c) An educated persons
- (d) An illiterate persons
> **Explanation:** In the northern part of the country, the village headman was known as the grama bhojaka. Usually, men from the same family held the position for generations. In other words, the post was hereditary. The grama bhojaka was often the largest landowner.

### Q4. Among the following, some of the largest collections of iron tools and weapons were found in the __________.
- (a) Sanchi stupas
- (b) Mehrgarh
- **(c) Megalithic burials** ✓
- (d) Ring wells
> **Explanation:** The use of iron began in the subcontinent around 3,000 years ago. Some of the largest collections of iron tools and weapons were found in the megalithic burials.

### Q5. People who did not have any land of their own and worked for others were known as:
- (a) Herders
- **(b) Dasa Karamakaras** ✓
- (c) Independent farmers
- (d) Grihapatis
> **Explanation:** Apart from the grama bhojaka, there were other independent farmers, known as grihapatis, most of whom were smaller landowners. And then there were men and women such as the Dasa Karamakaras, who did not own land and had to earn a living working on the fields owned by others.

### Q6. Ring wells were found in:
- (a) Kolkata
- (b) Mumbai
- **(c) Delhi** ✓
- (d) Chandigarh
> **Explanation:** Ring wells were usually found in Delhi. In many cities, archaeologists have found rows of pots or ceramic rings arranged one on top of the other. These are known as ring wells. These seem to have been used as toilets in some cases and as drains and garbage dumps. These ring wells are usually found in individual houses.

### Q7. Around 2,000 years ago, Mathura became the second capital of:
- (a) Mauryas
- **(b) Kushanas** ✓
- (c) Pallavas
- (d) Guptas
> **Explanation:** Mathura has been an important settlement for more than 2,500 years. Around 2,000 years ago, Mathura became the second capital of the Kushanas.

### Q8. What was Mathura famous for?
- **(a) Religious centre** ✓
- (b) Forested area
- (c) Port
- (d) All of these
> **Explanation:** Mathura was also a religious centre. There were Buddhist monasteries, Jaina shrines and it was an important centre for the worship of Krishna.

### Q9. Rules of spinning and weaving are mentioned in which chapter of the Arthashastra?
- **(a) Chapter 7** ✓
- (b) Chapter 10
- (c) Chapter 6
- (d) Chapter 11
> **Explanation:** Rules for spinning and weaving are mentioned in chapter 7 of the Arthashastra. They describe how spinning and weaving could be done in workshops under the supervision of a special official.

### Q10. Northern Black Polished Ware was known for its:
- (a) Farmer's association
- (b) Agriculture
- **(c) Fine pottery** ✓
- (d) King's palace
> **Explanation:** Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW) is a hard, wheel-made, metallic-looking ware with a shiny black surface. The potter used to expose the earthenware to very high temperature in his kiln, which resulted in the blackening on this, which gave the pots a mirror-like shine.

### Q11. Potters, blacksmiths, carpenters and weavers came under the category of ________.
- (a) Farmers
- (b) Kings
- **(c) Craftsmen** ✓
- (d) Herders
> **Explanation:** In most villages, there were also some craftspersons such as blacksmiths, potters, carpenters and weavers.

### Q12. Where were sculptures used by the ancient cities?
- **(a) To decorate railings, pillars, etc.** ✓
- (b) To decorate coins
- (c) None of these
- (d) Both (a) and (b)
> **Explanation:** Sculptors carved scenes depicting people's lives in towns and villages, as well as in the forest. Many of these sculptures were used to decorate railings, pillars and gateways of buildings that were visited by people.

### Q13. Who described all the ports he visited?
- (a) Megasthenes
- (b) An Italian sailor
- **(c) An unknown Greek sailor** ✓
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** Another way of finding out about early cities is from the accounts of sailors and travellers who visited them. One of the most detailed accounts that has been found was by an unknown Greek sailor.

### Q14. What was the period of existence of Arikamedu?
- (a) Between 2,200 and 2,000 years ago
- (b) Between 1,200 and 1,500 years ago
- (c) Between 5,000 and 6,000 years ago
- **(d) None of the above** ✓
> **Explanation:** There was a coastal settlement in Pondicherry, known as Arikamedu, which existed between 2,200 and 1,900 years ago. It was a coastal settlement where ships unloaded goods in warehouses from distant lands.

### Q15. Shrenis were associations of:
- (a) rulers
- **(b) crafts-persons** ✓
- (c) farmers
- (d) herders
> **Explanation:** Shrenis were the associations of crafts-persons and merchants. These shrenis of crafts-persons provided training, procured raw material and distributed the finished product.

## Level 02 | Advanced

### Q1. In the context of Mathura, consider the following statements:
1. Mathura has been an important settlement for more than 2,500 years.
2. It was located at the cross roads of two major routes of travel and trade.
3. There were fortifications around the city and several shrines.
Which among the following statements are correct?
- (a) Only one
- (b) Only two
- **(c) All three** ✓
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** Mathura has been an important settlement for more than 2,500 years. It was important because it was located at the cross-roads of two major routes of travel and trade—from the northwest to the east and from north to south. Hence, Statements 1 and 2 are correct. There were fortifications around the city and several shrines. Hence, Statement 3 is correct.

### Q2. Around 2,500 years ago, significant developments took place in agriculture.
1. Use of iron ploughshare
2. Planting of paddy
3. Irrigation measures
How many of the following is/are included in such developments?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- **(d) 1, 2 and 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** Around 2,500 years ago, there is evidence for the growing use of iron tools. These included axes for clearing forests and the iron ploughshare, which were useful for increasing agricultural production. While new tools and the system of transplantation increased production, irrigation was also used. Irrigation works built during this time included canals, wells, tanks and artificial lakes.

### Q3. Match List I with List II and choose the correct answer, using the code given below.
Villages (List 1): A. Large landowners, B. Ordinary ploughman, C. Landless labourers, D. Slaves
Name (List 2): 1. Adimai, 2. Kadaisiyar, 3. Uzhavar, 4. Vellalar
- (a) A-1, B-2, C-3, D-4
- (b) A-2, B-1, C-4, D-3
- **(c) A-4, B-3, C-2, D-1** ✓
- (d) A-3, B-4, C-2, D-1
> **Explanation:** There were at least three different kinds of people living in most villages in the southern and northern parts of the subcontinent. In the Tamil region, large landowners were known as Vellalar, ordinary ploughmen were known as Uzhavar and landless labourers, including slaves, were known as Kadaisiyar and Adimai.

### Q4. Consider the following statements:
1. Rules for spinning and weaving are written in the Arthashastra, mentioned in Chapter 11.
2. They describe how spinning and weaving could be done in workshops under the supervision of a special official.
3. Women who were not permitted to leave their homes could send maidservants to bring the raw material from the superintendent and return the finished work.
Which of the above statements is/are correct?
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- **(b) 2 and 3 only** ✓
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) 1 and 3 only
> **Explanation:** These rules are from the Arthashastra, mentioned in Chapter 7. They describe how spinning and weaving could be done in workshops under the supervision of a special official. Hence, Statement 1 is not correct. "Widows, young women who are differently abled, nuns, mothers of courtesans, retired women servants of the king, women who have retired from service in temples, women who are not permitted to leave their homes could send maidservants to bring the raw material from the superintendent and return the finished work. Hence, Statements 2 and 3 are correct.

### Q5. In the context of the villages in the northern part of the country, consider the following statements:
1. The village headman was known as the Grama Bhojaka.
2. Independent farmers and small landowners living in villages were called 'Bhupati'.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- **(a) 1 only** ✓
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Statement 1 is correct. In the northern part of the country, the village headman was known as the Grama Bhojaka. The Grama Bhojaka was often the largest landowner. Generally, he had slaves and hired workers to cultivate the land. Besides, as he was powerful, the king often used him to collect taxes from the village. He also functioned as a judge and sometimes as a policeman. Statement 2 is incorrect. Apart from the grama bhojaka, there were other independent farmers, known as grihapatis, most of whom were smaller landowners.

### Q6. Sangam literature was written in which of the following languages?
- (a) Sanskrit
- **(b) Tamil** ✓
- (c) Telugu
- (d) Kannada
> **Explanation:** Some of the earliest works in Tamil, known as Sangam literature, were composed around 2,300 years ago. These texts were called Sangam because they were supposed to have been composed and compiled in assemblies (known as Sangamas) of poets that were held in the city of Madurai.

### Q7. In the context of the means of exchange, consider the following statements:
1. The punch-marked coins were the earliest coins, which were made of tin.
2. Items were also used as the means of exchange in the Sangam period.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- **(b) 2 only** ✓
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Statement 1 is incorrect. The earliest coins which were in use for about 500 years were punch marked coins. They have been given this name because the designs were punched on to the metal—silver or copper.

### Q8. Consider the following assertion with the given reason:
Assertion: Mathura has been an important settlement for more than 2,500 years.
Reason: Mathura was located at the crossroads of two major routes of travel and trade.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- **(a) Both assertion and reason are correct, and reason is the correct explanation of the assertion.** ✓
- (b) Both assertion and reason are correct, but reason is not the correct explanation of the assertion.
- (c) Assertion is correct, but the reason is not correct.
- (d) Assertion is not correct, but the reason is correct.
> **Explanation:** Mathura has been an important settlement for more than 2,500 years. It was important because it was located at the crossroads of two major routes of travel and trade—from the northwest to the east and from north to south. There were fortifications around the city and several shrines. Mathura was also a centre where some extremely fine sculpture was produced.

### Q9. In the context of the Arikamedu, consider the following statements:
1. Arikamedu was a coastal settlement where ships unloaded goods from distant lands.
2. Arikamedu was developed between 2,200 and 1,900 years ago.
3. There was a warehouse to store goods.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- **(d) 1, 2, 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** Between 2,200 and 1,900 years ago, Arikamedu was a coastal settlement where ships unloaded goods from distant lands. Hence, Statements 1 and 2 are correct. A massive brick structure, which may have been a warehouse, was found at the site. Hence, Statement 3 is correct. Other finds include pottery from the Mediterranean region, such as amphorae (tall double-handled jars that contained liquids such as wine or oil) and stamped red-glazed pottery, known as Arretine Ware, named after a city in Italy.

### Q10. Which of the following scripts was used for the Tamil language in the beginning?
- **(a) Brahmi** ✓
- (b) Greek
- (c) Sanskrit
- (d) Malayalam
> **Explanation:** The Tamil-Brahmi script has been palaeographically and stratigraphically dated between the third century BCE and the first century CE. It constitutes the earliest known writing system evidenced in many parts of Tamil Nadu, Kerala Andhra Pradesh and Sri Lanka.

### Q11. Consider the following statements regarding Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW):
1. NBPW is a hard, wheel-made, metallic-looking ware with a shiny black surface.
2. A fine black slip was also applied on this, which gave the pottery a mirror-like shine.
3. NBPW generally found in northeastern and central India.
How many of the above statements is/are incorrect?
- (a) Only one
- (b) Only two
- **(c) All three** ✓
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** NBPW is a hard, wheel-made, metallic-looking ware with a shiny black surface. The potter used to expose the earthenware to very high temperature in his kiln, which resulted in the blackening on this, which gave the pots a mirror-like shine. Hence, Statements 1 and 2 are correct. We also have archaeological evidence for crafts. Northern Black Polished Ware (NBPW). It gets its name from the fact that it is generally found in the northeastern and central part of the subcontinent. Hence Statement 3 is also correct.

### Q12. In the context of Rome, consider the following statements:
1. Rome developed at the same time as the cities in the Ganga valley.
2. Augustus ruled in Rome around 3,000 years ago.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- **(a) 1 only** ✓
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Both statements are correct. Statement 1: Rome is one of the oldest cities in Europe and developed around the same time as the cities in the Ganga valley. Statement 2: Augustus, one of the most important emperors, who ruled about 2,000 years ago, said that the city of brick, and made it into a city of marble. He and later rulers, built temples and palaces.

## Level 03 | Previous Years

### Q1. Consider the following statements, with reference to Jatakas:
1. Jatakas are the compilation of stories from the previous birth of Buddha.
2. These are also associated with the stories Bodhisatva or the future Buddha.
3. Jatakas are canonical literature, which is a part of Buddhist literature.
Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 and 3 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- **(c) 1 and 2 only** ✓
- (d) 1, 2 and 3
[UPSC]
> **Explanation:** Statement 3 is incorrect. The Jatakas are the best example of Buddhist non-canonical literature. They are a compilation of stories from previous births of Buddha. The Jataka tales are a voluminous body of literature native to India, concerning the previous births of Gautama Buddha. These are the stories that tell us about the previous lives of the Buddha, in both human and animal form. Jataka tales were written in Pali language, making them relatable to everyone.

### Q2. Tolkappiyam in Sangam age is the greatest work of literature.
- **(a) Tamil** ✓
- (b) Telugu
- (c) Sanskrit
- (d) Kannada
[SSC]
> **Explanation:** Tolkappiyam is the most ancient extant Tamil grammar text and the oldest surviving long work of Tamil literature. The surviving manuscripts of the Tolkappiyam consist of three books, each with nine chapters, with a cumulative total of 1,610 sutras in the nurpa meter.

### Q3. In the history of Indian coinage, Punch-Marked Coins (PMC) have a special place. Which of the following statements are true with reference to PMC? [KARNATAKA PCS]
1. They are the earliest coinage in India.
2. They were not in circulation in South India.
3. We can notice symbols on one or both sides of the coins.
4. These coins are made of silver.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- (a) 1 and 4 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 2 and 4
- **(d) 1, 3 and 4** ✓
> **Explanation:** Punch-marked coins, also known as Aahat coins, are a kind of early Indian coinage dating from the 6th to 2nd centuries BC. They had an amorphous form. The first coins were cast and die-struck on only one side. In South India, punch-marked coins are the earliest known form of coinage. It is noteworthy that silver punch-marked coin was found at Banavasi in Karnataka and this is perhaps the earliest coin of Karnataka. Hence, Statement 2 is not correct.

### Q4. In the context of early Indian history, the term 'NBPW' refers to a:
- (a) Dating technique
- **(b) Pottery type** ✓
- (c) Settlement pattern
- (d) Neolithic tool-making technique
[UPSC]
> **Explanation:** The Northern Black Polished Ware culture (abbreviated NBPW or NBP) is an urban Iron Age Indian culture of the Indian subcontinent, lasting 700–200 BCE (presently NBPW between 1200 and 700 BCE), succeeding the Painted Grey Ware culture and Black and Red Ware culture. It developed beginning around 700 BCE, in the late Vedic period and peaked from 500–300 BCE, coinciding with the emergence of 16 great states or mahajanapadas in Northern India and the subsequent rise of the Mauryan Empire.

### Q5. Which one of the following, explains the practice of Vattakirutal, as mentioned in Sangam poems?
- (a) Kings employing women bodyguards
- (b) Learned persons assembling in royal courts to discuss religious and philosophical matters
- (c) Young girls keeping watchover agricultural fields and driving away birds and animals
- **(d) A king defeated in a battle committing ritual suicide by starving himself to death** ✓
> **Explanation:** Sangam poems are pervaded with a warrior ethic. In the Puram poems, a heroic death was greatly valued, and the goal of the hero was pukal (glory, fame). It was believed that the spirit of a warrior who died in battle dwelt in paradise. A poem in the Puranuru suggests that the bodies of warriors who did not die in battle were cut with swords before the funeral rites, to simulate death in battle. Vattakirutal was a Tamil ritual of fasting till death, especially widespread during the Sangam age. The Tamil kings, in order to save their honour and prestige, were prepared to meet their death facing North (Vatakkiruttal), and never would they turn their back in battle. It was a Tamil martial practice. This was either done alone or as a group with their supporters of the captured king.
