---
subject: "History NCERT"
class: 6
chapter: 11
title: "New Empires and Kingdoms"
---

## Level 01 | Moderate

### Q1. Who was the famous ruler of the Gupta dynasty?
- (a) Harshavardhana
- **(b) Samudragupta** ✓
- (c) Ashoka
- (d) Mahavira
> **Explanation:** Samudragupta was the first significant ruler of the Gupta Dynasty. Upon ascending the throne, he decided to extend the boundaries of his empire to cover the multiple kingdoms and republics that existed outside its pale. Known as the 'Napoleon of India' for his conquests, he was also a man of many talents and laid a firm foundation for the empire.

### Q2. Which ruler stopped Harshavardhana when he tried to cross the Narmada to march into the Deccan?
- **(a) Pulakeshin-II** ✓
- (b) Ravikirti
- (c) Samudragupta
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** Harsha took over the kingdom of Kanauj and then led an army against the ruler of Bengal. Although he was successful in the east and conquered Magadha and probably Bengal also, he was not as successful elsewhere. He tried crossing the Narmada to march into the Deccan, but was stopped by Pulakeshin II, a ruler of the Chalukya dynasty.

### Q3. To which language does the term 'Prashasti' belong?
- (a) English
- (b) Hindi
- **(c) Sanskrit** ✓
- (d) Tamil
> **Explanation:** Prashastis are a special kind of inscription meaning "in praise of". They were composed in praise of the rulers. An important example is a prashasti of Samudragupta. It is a poem in Sanskrit, composed by his court poet, Harishena, nearly 1,700 years ago.

### Q4. What was the meaning of Kumar-amatya?
- **(a) Minister** ✓
- (b) Chief banker
- (c) Scribe
- (d) Judicial officer
> **Explanation:** The monarchs relied heavily on land revenue and a village served as the fundamental administrative unit. Government positions were inherited. Harishena, for example, was a maha-danda-nayaka, or Chief Judicial Officer. Many times, one person held many positions. The poet Harisena, for example, was also a Kumar-Amartya (important minister) and a sangha-vigrahika (Minister of War and Peace).

### Q5. Who was the father of Samudragupta?
- (a) Harishena
- (b) Banabhatta
- (c) Ramagupta
- **(d) Chandragupta I** ✓
> **Explanation:** Samudragupta was a son of the Gupta king Chandragupta I and queen Kumaradevi, who came from a Licchavi family. His fragmentary Eran stone inscription states that his father selected him as the successor because of his "devotion, righteous conduct and valour."

### Q6. What was the name of the assembly of Brahmin land-owners?
- (a) Sera
- (b) Samiti
- **(c) Sabha** ✓
- (d) Sudha
> **Explanation:** The inscriptions of the Pallavas mention a number of local assemblies. These included the sabha, which was an assembly of Brahmin land-owners. This assembly functioned through subcommittees, which looked after irrigation, agricultural operations, making roads, local temples, etc.

### Q7. Xuan Zang visited India during the period of which Indian emperor?
- (a) Ramagupta
- **(b) Harshavardhana** ✓
- (c) Samudragupta
- (d) Chandragupta II
> **Explanation:** Harshavardhana, who ruled nearly 1,400 years ago, was one such ruler. His court poet, Banabhatta, wrote his biography, the Harshacharita, in Sanskrit. This gives us the genealogy of Harsha and ends with his becoming king. Xuan Zang also spent a lot of time at Harsha's court and left a detailed account of what he saw.

### Q8. Who wrote the biography of Harshavardhana?
- (a) Ashvaghosha
- (b) Amir Khusro
- **(c) Banabhatta** ✓
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** Harshavardhana's biography Harshacharita ("Deeds of Harsha") written by Sanskrit poet Banabhatta, describes his association with Thanesar, besides mentioning the defence wall, a moat and a palace with a two-storied Dhavalagriha (white mansion).

### Q9. A famous poetry drama Abhijana Shakuntalam was authored by:
- (a) Brahmagupta
- (b) Bhavabhuti
- (c) Kalharia
- **(d) Kalidasa** ✓
> **Explanation:** Abhijnana Shakuntalam drama by Kalidasa composed about the 5th century CE, is considered to be the greatest Indian literary work of any period. Kalidasa was a Classical Sanskrit author who is often considered ancient India's greatest poet and playwright. His plays and poetry are primarily based on the Vedas, the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas.

### Q10. The language used by Brahmins was:
- (a) Prakrit
- **(b) Sanskrit** ✓
- (c) Tamil
- (d) Brahmin
> **Explanation:** Kalidasa is known for his plays depicting life in the king's court. An interesting feature about these plays is that the king and most Brahmins are shown speaking Sanskrit, while women and men, other than the king and Brahmins, use Prakrit.

### Q11. The famous poet, Kalidasa, lived in the court of _____.
- **(a) Chandragupta II** ✓
- (b) Chandragupta
- (c) Samudragupta
- (d) Kumaragupta
> **Explanation:** Kalidasa was a court poet of a king named Vikramaditya (Chandragupta-II). Chandragupta II, also known by his title Vikramaditya, was one of the most powerful emperors of the Gupta Empire in northern India. Kalidasa a Classical Sanskrit author, is often considered ancient India's greatest poet and playwright. His plays and poetry are primarily based on the Vedas, the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas.

### Q12. Which of the following was the capital of the Chalukyas?
- **(a) Aihole** ✓
- (b) Sri Lanka
- (c) Kanauj
- (d) Madurai
> **Explanation:** Aihole, the capital of the Chalukyas, was an important trading centre. It developed as a religious centre, with a number of temples.

### Q13. Abhijnana Shakuntalam is the love story of _____.
- **(a) Dushyanta and Shakuntala** ✓
- (b) Banabhatta and Shakuntala
- (c) Chandragupta I and Shakuntala
- (d) Kumargupta and Shakuntala
> **Explanation:** Abhijnana Shakuntalam is the story of the love between a king named Dushyanta and a young woman named Shakuntala.

### Q14. What was the Chief judicial officer called?
- **(a) Maha-danda-nayaka** ✓
- (b) Maha-hukum-nayaka
- (c) Maha-raja-nayaka
- (d) Maha-niyam-nayaka
> **Explanation:** Harishena was called maha-danda-nayaka (chief judicial officer), like his father.

## Level 02 | Advanced

### Q1. The inscription on the Ashokan pillar at Allahabad provides information about which of the following rulers?
- (a) Chandragupta Maurya
- (b) Chandragupta I
- (c) Chandragupta II
- **(d) Samudragupta** ✓
> **Explanation:** Samudragupta was a ruler of the Gupta Empire of Ancient India. As the son of Gupta emperor Chandragupta I and the Licchavis princess Kumaradevi, he greatly expanded his dynasty's political power. We know about Samudragupta from a long inscription, inscribed on the Ashokan pillar at Allahabad. It was composed as a Kavya by Harishena, who was a poet and a minister at the court of Samudragupta.

### Q2. Consider the following statements in the context of the description provided by Harishena about Samudragupta and four different kinds of rulers:
1. Samudragupta uprooted nine rulers of Aryavarta and merged their kingdoms into his empire.
2. He defeated all the 12 rulers of Dakshinapatha and made their kingdoms, a part of his empire.
3. The inner circle of neighbouring, states brought tribute, followed his orders and attended his court.
4. The rulers of the outlying, areas submitted to him and offered daughters in marriage.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1, 3 and 4 only
- **(d) 1, 2, 3 and 4** ✓
> **Explanation:** The nine rulers of Aryavarta were uprooted and their kingdoms were made a part of Samudragupta's empire. Hence, Statement 1 is correct. The twelve rulers of Dakshinapatha surrendered to Samudragupta after being defeated and he then allowed them to rule again. Hence, Statement 2 is incorrect. The inner circle of neighbouring states, including Assam, coastal Bengal, Nepal and a number of gana sanghas in the northwest, brought tribute, followed his orders and attended his court. Hence, Statement 3 is correct. The rulers of the outlying areas, perhaps the descendants of the Kushanas and Shakas, along with the ruler of Sri Lanka, submitted to him and offered daughters in marriage. Hence, Statement 4 is correct.

### Q3. Which of the following rulers adopted the title of Maharajadhiraja?
1. Chandragupta I
2. Samudragupta
3. Chandragupta II
4. Kumar Gupta

Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- **(a) 1 only** ✓
- (b) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) 2 and 4 only
> **Explanation:** Chandragupta was the first ruler of the Gupta dynasty to adopt the grand title of Maharajadhiraja, a title that Samudragupta also used. His great grandfather and grandfather are mentioned simply as maharajas.

### Q4. Consider the following statements:
1. The Pallavas and Chalukyas frequently raided one another's lands.
2. Both the Pallavas and the Chalukyas gave way to new rulers belonging to the Rashtrakuta and Chola dynasties.

Which of the following statements is/are correct?
- (a) Only one
- (b) Only two
- **(c) Both** ✓
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** Both the above statements are correct. The Pallavas and Chalukyas frequently raided each other's lands, especially attacking the capital cities, which were prosperous towns. The Chalukya victory was short-lived. Ultimately, both the Pallavas and the Chalukyas gave way to new rulers belonging to the Rashtrakuta and Chola dynasties.

### Q5. In the context of the earlier administration of the kingdoms, consider the following statements:
1. Some important administrative posts were now hereditary.
2. The city was the basic unit of administration.
3. Sometimes, one person held many offices.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- **(a) 1 and 3 only** ✓
- (b) 2 only
- (c) 1 only
- (d) 2 and 3 only
> **Explanation:** Some important administrative posts were now hereditary. This means that sons succeeded fathers to these posts. For example, the poet Harishena was a maha-dandanayaka, or chief judicial officer, like his father. Hence, Statement 1 is correct. The village remained the basic unit of administration. Hence, Statement 2 is incorrect. Sometimes, one person held many offices. For instance, besides being a maha-danda-nayaka, Harishena was a kumar-amatya, meaning an important minister and a sandhi-vigraha, meaning a minister of war and peace. Hence, Statement 3 is correct.

### Q6. Match List I with List II and select the correct answer:

| List I | List II |
|--------|---------|
| A. Nagara-shreshthi | 1. Leader of the merchant caravans |
| B. Sarthavaha | 2. Head of the scribes |
| C. Prathama-kulika | 3. Chief banker or merchant of the city |
| D. Kayasthas | 4. Chief craftsman |

- (a) A-2, B-1, C-3, D-4
- (b) A-1, B-2, C-3, D-4
- **(c) A-3, B-1, C-4, D-2** ✓
- (d) A-1, B-3, C-4, D-2
> **Explanation:** Important men probably had a say in local administration. These included: Nagara-shreshthi or chief banker or merchant of the city; The Sarthavaha or leader of the merchant caravans; The Prathama-kulika or the chief craftsman; The head of the Kayasthas.

### Q7. In the context of the Samantas, consider the following statements:
1. There were military leaders who provided the king with troops whenever he needed them.
2. They were not paid regular salaries.
3. Whenever the ruler was weak, samantas tried to become independent.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 2 and 3 only
- (c) 3 only
- **(d) 1, 2 and 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** All the statements given above are correct.

### Q8. In the context of the assemblies in the southern kingdoms, consider the following pairs:
1. Sabha: Assembly of Brahmin land-owners
2. Ur: Village assembly
3. Nagaram: Organisation of craftsmen

How many pairs is/are incorrectly matched?
- **(a) Only one** ✓
- (b) Only two
- (c) All three
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** The inscriptions of the Pallavas mention a number of local assemblies. The Sabha: It was an assembly of Brahmin landowners. The Ur: It was a village assembly found in areas where the land owners were not Brahmins. The Nagaram (Incorrect): It was an organisation of merchants. It is likely that these assemblies were controlled by rich and powerful landowners and merchants.

### Q9. In the context of the features of Kalidasa's plays, consider the following statements:
1. Kalidasa is known for his plays depicting life in the king's court.
2. An interesting feature about these plays is that the king and most Brahmins use Prakrit, while women and men other than the king and Brahmins are shown speaking Sanskrit.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- **(a) 1 only** ✓
- (b) 2 only
- (c) Both 1 and 2
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Kalidasa is known for his plays depicting life in the king's court. Hence, Statement 1 is correct. An interesting feature about these plays is that the king and most Brahmins are shown speaking Sanskrit, while women and men other than the king and Brahmins use Prakrit. Hence, Statement 2 is not correct. His most famous play, Abhijnana Shakuntalam, is the story of the love between a king named Dushyanta and a young woman named Shakuntala.

## Level 03 | Previous Years

### Q1. Who among the following is known for his work on medicine during the Gupta period? [BPSC]
- **(a) Sushruta** ✓
- (b) Saumilla
- (c) Shudraka
- (d) Shaunaka
> **Explanation:** Sushruta was an ancient Indian physician and surgeon known today as India's "Father of Surgery" and "Father of Plastic Surgery" or "Father of Brain Surgery" for inventing and developing surgical procedures. Sushruta is known for his work on medicine during the Gupta period. The Gupta Era (320 AD–550 AD) considered to be the golden era of India in terms of art, literature, astronomy, medical science, etc.

### Q2. Who is the author of the Allahabad Pillar Inscription? [WBCS]
- (a) Rudradaman
- **(b) Harishena** ✓
- (c) Samudragupta
- (d) Banabhatta
> **Explanation:** Samudragupta's court poet and minister Harishena composed the Allahabad pillar inscription or Prayag Prasasti. The pillar was originally erected by Ashoka six centuries earlier. This inscription is a eulogy of Samudragupta and mentions the conquests of Samudragupta and boundaries of the Gupta Empire.

### Q3. From the decline of the Guptas until the rise of Harshavardhana in the early seventh century, which of the following kingdoms were holding power in Northern India? [UPSC]
1. The Guptas of Magadha
2. The Paramaras of Malwa
3. The Pushyabhutis of Thanesar
4. The Maukharis of Kanauj
5. The Yadavas of Devagiri

- (a) 1, 2 and 5
- (b) 2, 3 and 4
- **(c) 1, 3 and 4** ✓
- (d) 1, 4 and 5
> **Explanation:** From the decline of Guptas until the rise of Harshvardhana, new ruling dynasties emerged in different parts of Northern India. The most prominent ones were: The Pushyabhutis of Thaneshwar, The Maukharies of Kannauj, Maitrakas of Vallabhi, etc. The Paramara was a Rajput dynasty that ruled Malwa and surrounding areas in west-central India between the 9th and 14th centuries. Hence Statement 2 is not correct. The Yadavas initially ruled as feudatories of the Western Chalukyas. Around the middle of the 12th century, as the Chalukya power waned, the Yadava king Bhillama V declared independence. Hence Statement 5 is not correct. Hence, except Statements 2 and 5, all the given statements are correct.

### Q4. Which of the following dynasties ruled in Northern India between the decline of the Guptas and the rise of Harshavardhana?
1. The Guptas of Magadha
2. The Paramaras of Malwa
3. The Pushyabhutis of Thanesar
4. The Maukharis of Kanauj
5. The Yadavas of Devagiri
6. The Maitrakas of Valabhi

Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- (a) 1, 2 and 5
- **(b) 1, 3, 4 and 6** ✓
- (c) 2, 3 and 4
- (d) 5 and 6
> **Explanation:** From the decline of Guptas until the rise of Harshvardhana, new ruling dynasties emerged in different parts of Northern India. The most prominent ones were: The Guptas of Magadha, The Pushyabhutis of Thaneshwar, The Maukharies of Kannauj, and the Maitrakas of Vallabhi. The Paramara dynasty ruled Malwa between the 9th and 14th centuries, and the Yadavas ruled much later as feudatories of the Chalukyas before declaring independence in the 12th century.

### Q5. With reference to the period of the Gupta dynasty, ancient India, the towns Ghantasala, Kadura and Chaul were well known as: [UPSC]
- **(a) Ports handling foreign trade** ✓
- (b) Capitals of powerful kingdoms
- (c) Places of exquisite stone art and architecture
- (d) Important Buddhist pilgrimage centres
> **Explanation:** In the Andhra region, the ports were Kadura and Ghantasala. Kaveripattinam (Puhar) and Tondai were the ports of the Pandya region. Hence, the correct answer is 'ports handling foreign trade'. During the Gupta period, there was a flourishing external and internal trade. The trades were carried both by land and rivers. During this period, the wealth of the Roman Empire reached India through the ports of Kalyan, Chaul, Broach and Cambay in Western India. Tamralipti was an important port in Bengal. It carried on trade with China, Lanka, Java and Sumatra. In the Andhra region, the ports were Kadura and Ghantasala. Kaveripattanam (Puhar) and Tondai were the ports of the Pandya region. The ports of Kottayam and Muziris were on the Malabar coast.

### Q6. With reference to forced labour (Vishti) in India during the Gupta period, which one of the following statements is correct?
- **(a) It was considered a source of income for the State** ✓
- (b) It was totally absent in the Madhya Pradesh and Kathiawar regions of the Gupta Empire.
- (c) The forced labourer was entitled to weekly wages.
- (d) The eldest son of the labourer was sent as a forced labourer.
> **Explanation:** In the Gupta Era, the term Vishti referred to forced labour. The empire obtained their percentage of the material surplus through taxes like Shulka, Bali and Kar, etc., forced labour like Balutam and Vishti and other perquisites. Vishti was prominent in ancient Southern India. Vishti was used as a form of tax by the king that the peasants had to perform as service.

### Q7. Who wrote Samudragupta's prashasti (a eulogy written in the form of poetry or prose, usually by court poets) at Allahabad? [SSC]
- (a) Kalidasa
- (b) Vagabhatta
- **(c) Harishena** ✓
- (d) Amarsimha
> **Explanation:** An important example is the prashasti of Samudragupta. It is a poem in Sanskrit, composed by his court poet Harishena, nearly 1,700 years ago. It is inscribed on the Ashokan pillar at Allahabad. The poet has praised the king in glowing terms.

### Q8. Who is known as the 'Napoleon of India'? [UKPCS]
- (a) Akbar
- (b) Malik Ambar
- (c) Chandragupta Maurya
- **(d) Samudragupta** ✓
> **Explanation:** Samudragupta (335–375 AD) of the Gupta dynasty is known as the Napoleon of India. Historian A. V. Smith called him so because of his great military conquests known from the 'Prayag Prashati' written by his courtier and poet Harishena, who also describes him as the hero of a hundred battles.

### Q9. Who among the following ancient Indian kings was praised in glowing terms in the Prayaga Prashasti? [CDS]
- (a) Ashoka
- (b) Harshavardhana
- **(c) Samudragupta** ✓
- (d) Bindusara
> **Explanation:** The Allahabad pillar is a stambha, containing one of the pillar edicts of Ashoka, possibly erected by Ashoka, Emperor of the Maurya dynasty. Prayag Prashasti is the name given to this pillar. Although it is primarily an Ashokan pillar, it has four different inscriptions: The usual Ashokan inscriptions in Brahmi script, similar to those found on other pillars; The Queen's Edict regaling the charitable deeds of Ashoka's wife, Karuvaki; An inscription of Samudragupta (335–375 AD), written by Harishena in Sanskrit language and Brahmi script; An inscription added by Jahangir in Persian.

### Q10. Consider the following dynasties:
1. Hoysala
2. Gahadavala
3. Kakatiya
4. Yadava

How many of the above dynasties established their kingdoms in the early eighth century AD? [UPSC]
- (a) Only one
- (b) Only two
- (c) Only three
- **(d) None** ✓
> **Explanation:** The Hoysala dynasty was established in the 10th century AD. The Gahadavala dynasty was established in the 11th century AD. The Kakatiya dynasty was established in the 12th century AD. The Yadava dynasty was established in the 13th century AD. Therefore, none of the dynasties established their kingdoms in the early eighth century AD.
