---
subject: "History NCERT"
class: 6
chapter: 2
title: "FROM HUNTING-GATHERING TO GROWING FOOD"
---

## Level 01 | Moderate

### Q1. __________ is the name given to the process in which people grow plants and look after animals.
- (a) Plantation
- (b) Rearing
- (c) Herding
- **(d) Domestication** ✓
> **Explanation:** Domestication is the adaptation of an animal (wild or natural state (as by selective breeding) to life in close association with humans. It is the process of adapting wild plants and animals for human use. Domestic species are raised for food, work, clothing, medicine and many other uses. Domesticated plants and animals must be raised and cared by humans. Domesticated species differ from their wild counterparts.

### Q2. The art of making pots is called:
- (a) Poetries
- (b) Potteries
- **(c) Pottery** ✓
- (d) Artefacts
> **Explanation:** Pottery is the process and the products of forming vessels and other objects with clay and other ceramic materials, which are fired at high temperatures to give them a hard and durable form. Major types include earthenware, stoneware and porcelain.

### Q3. Earliest people began using pots for:
- (a) Making food
- (b) Storing food
- **(c) Both (a) and (b)** ✓
- (d) Neither (a) nor (b)
> **Explanation:** People began using pots for cooking and storing food, especially grains like rice, wheat and lentils that now have become an important part of the diet.

### Q4. Which animal was first domesticated by the earliest people?
- **(a) Dog** ✓
- (b) Sheep
- (c) Goat
- (d) Elephant
> **Explanation:** People started taming animals by leaving food for them near their shelters. The first animal to be tamed was the wild ancestor of the dog. Animals such as sheep, goat, cattle and also pigs lived in herds and most of them ate grass.

### Q5. Bhimbetka caves and rock shelters are close to which river valley?
- (a) Ganga River Valley
- **(b) Narmada River Valley** ✓
- (c) Indus River Valley
- (d) Son River Valley
> **Explanation:** Bhimbetka is an old site with caves and rock shelters. People chose these natural caves because they provided shelter from the rain, heat and wind. These rock shelters are close to the Narmada valley.

### Q6. Consider the following statements regarding rock paintings:
1. Remnants of rock paintings have been found on the walls of the caves.
2. Early people drew on rock surfaces that depicted their social and economic life.

Select the correct answer using the code given below:
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 2 only
- **(c) Both 1 and 2** ✓
- (d) Neither 1 nor 2
> **Explanation:** Earliest people used to draw images and symbols on rock surfaces. Many of the caves in which these early people lived have paintings on the walls. In India, remnants of rock paintings have been found on the walls of caves situated in several districts of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Karnataka, Kerala, Bihar and Uttarakhand.

### Q7. Why did hunter-gatherers move from place to place?
- (a) In search of food
- (b) In search of shelters
- **(c) Both (a) and (b)** ✓
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** Hunter-gatherers travelled from place to place to find food, shelters, water, etc. If they stayed at one place for a long time, they would have eaten up all the available plant and animal resources. Therefore, they moved from place to place in search of food and water, as they are necessary for survival.

### Q8. The Mesolithic period falls under which period?
- (a) 2 million years to 12000 years ago
- **(b) 12,000 years ago to 10,000 years ago** ✓
- (c) From about 10,000 years ago
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** The period when we find environmental changes, beginning about 12,000 years ago till about 10,000 years ago is called the Mesolithic Age (Middle Stone Age). Stone tools found during this period are generally tiny and are called microliths.

### Q9. Why did people store grains?
- (a) For food
- (b) To use as seeds
- **(c) Both (a) and (b)** ✓
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** People had to stay in the same place for a long time looking after the plants, watering, weeding, driving away animals and birds until the grain ripened. Then they start thinking of storing the grain for food and seeds. They began making large clay pots, weaving baskets, or digging pits into the ground.

### Q10. Where is the evidence of wheat, barley, sheep, goat and cattle found?
- (a) Koldihwa (UP)
- (b) Gufkral (Kashmir)
- (c) Hallur (Andhra Pradesh)
- **(d) Mehrgarh (Pakistan)** ✓
> **Explanation:** Mehrgarh is a Neolithic archaeological site situated in Balochistan, Pakistan. It is located near the Bolan Pass, which is one of the most important routes into Iran.

### Q11. Where is Mehrgarh, a Neolithic archaeological site situated?
- (a) Tajikistan
- **(b) Pakistan** ✓
- (c) Afghanistan
- (d) Taliban

### Q12. Which of the following is not associated with the development of grasslands?
- (a) Rice
- (b) Wheat
- (c) Barley
- **(d) Apple** ✓
> **Explanation:** Apple is not associated with development of grassland. After the development of grasslands, people came to know about growing wheat, rice and barley.

## Level 02 | Advanced

### Q1. Consider the following statements regarding hunter-gatherers:
1. They used to move from one place to another to fight other tribes and occupy their lands.
2. They had to follow the movements of animals to hunt them.
3. They moved from season to season in search of different kinds of plants.
4. Hunter-gatherers chose to live in caves and rock shelters because they provided them protection from the rain, heat and wind.

How many of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) Only one
- (b) Only two
- **(c) Only three** ✓
- (d) All four
> **Explanation:** Earliest people known as hunter-gatherers used to move from place to place to find food, shelter, water, etc. Hence, Statement 1 is not correct. Animals move from place to place, so these people had to follow their movements for hunting purposes. People may have moved from season to season in search of different kinds of plants. Hence, Statements 2 and 3 are correct. Hunter-gatherers used to live in caves and rock shelters because they provided them protection from the rain, heat and wind. Hence, Statement 4 is correct.

### Q2. The middle stone period is also known as __________.
- **(a) Mesolithic** ✓
- (b) Neolithic
- (c) Palaeolithic
- (d) Microliths
> **Explanation:** The Mesolithic Age, also called the Middle Stone Age, is an ancient cultural stage or level that exists between the Palaeolithic (Old Stone Age), with its chipped stone tools and the Neolithic (New Stone Age), with its polished stone tools. The period when we find environmental changes, beginning about 12,000 years ago till about 10,000 years ago is called the Mesolithic Age (Middle Stone Age).

### Q3. Which of the following periods of the Stone Age first witnessed the domestication of animals?
- (a) Palaeolithic Age
- (b) Chalcolithic Age
- (c) Neolithic Age
- **(d) Mesolithic Age** ✓
> **Explanation:** Mesolithic Age falls roughly from 9000 BC to 4000 BC in India. It was the transitional phase between the Palaeolithic Age and Neolithic Age. Although Mesolithic people were still largely dependent on hunting, they began taming animals like dogs, sheep, goats, cattle, buffaloes, wild horse, etc. The earliest evidence of the taming of animals was found at Adamgarh of Madhya Pradesh and Baghore in Rajasthan. They are Mesolithic sites. Hence, Option (d) is correct.

### Q4. Traces of ash have been found in which of the following archaeological sites?
- **(a) Caves of Bhimbetka** ✓
- (b) Kurnool Cave
- (c) Koldihwa
- (d) Hunsgi
> **Explanation:** Traces of ash have been found in the Kurnool caves. This suggests that the people in the past used fire. This shows people were familiar with fire. Fire could have been used for many things: as a source of light, to roast meat and to scare away animals.

### Q5. Consider the following statements regarding the stone ages:
1. The Palaeolithic period extends from 50,000 years ago to about 12,000 years ago.
2. The Palaeolithic period can be divided into lower, middle and upper Palaeolithic age.
3. In Palaeolithic, "palaeo" means age and "lithos" means stone.

Which sentence is correct select the correct answer using the code given below:
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- **(c) 2 only** ✓
- (d) 2 and 3 only
> **Explanation:** The Palaeolithic period extends from 2 million years ago to about 12,000 years ago. Hence, Statement 1 is not correct. This long stretch of time is divided into the Lower, Middle and Upper Palaeolithic. Hence, Statement 2 is correct. The word Palaeolithic comes from two Greek words, 'palaeo' meaning old and 'lithos', meaning stone. Hence, Statement 3 is not correct.

### Q6. In the context of the new changes that came from climatic change in the Middle Ages, consider the following statements:
1. In many areas, increasing temperature led to the development of grasslands.
2. Fishing also became important.
3. Grains like wheat, barley and rice grew naturally.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- **(d) All the above** ✓
> **Explanation:** All the above three statements are correct. Around 12,000 years ago, there were major changes in the climate of the world, with a shift to relatively warm conditions. In many areas, this led to the development of grasslands. This, in turn, led to an increase in the number of deer, antelope, goat, sheep and cattle, i.e., animals that survived on grass. Fishing also became important. This was also a time when several grain-bearing grasses, including wheat, barley and rice grew naturally in different parts of the subcontinent. Men, women and children probably collected these grains as food and learnt where they grew and when they ripened.

### Q7. In the context of Bhimbetka Caves, consider the following statements:
1. The Bhimbetka Caves are located in the Sindhudurg District of Maharashtra.
2. The Bhimbetka Cave is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
3. The Bhimbetka rock shelters were discovered by V. S. Wakankar in 1957.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- **(c) 2 and 3 only** ✓
- (d) 1, 2 and 3 only
> **Explanation:** The Bhimbetka rock shelters are an archaeological site in central India that spans the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods, as well as the historic period. It is located in the Raisen District in the Indian state of Madhya Pradesh, about 45 kilometres (28 mi) south-east of Bhopal. Hence, Statement 1 is not correct. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site that consists of seven hills and over 750 rock shelters distributed over 10 km (6.2 mi). Hence, statement 2 is correct. The caves were discovered in 1957 by D.S. Wakankar, a well-known archaeologist. Hence, statement 3 is correct.

### Q8. Consider the following statements regarding Mehrgarh:
1. Mehrgarh was one of the places where people learned to grow barley and wheat.
2. The shape of the houses at Mehrgarh was square or rectangular.
3. The people of Mehrgarh believed that there is a life after death.
4. In Mehrgarh, the dead person was buried with the dog.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1, 2 and 3 only
- (b) 1, 3 and 4 only
- (c) 2 and 4 only
- **(d) 1, 3 and 4 only** ✓
> **Explanation:** Mehrgarh was one of the places where people learnt to grow barley and wheat and rear sheep and goats for the first time in this area. Hence, Statement 1 is correct. At this village, many animal bones were found. Other finds at Mehrgarh include remains of square or rectangular houses. Hence, Statement 2 is correct. When people die, their relatives and friends pay respect to them. The dead person was buried with goats, which were probably meant to serve as food in the next world. Hence, Statement 3 is correct but Statement 4 is not correct.

## Level 03 | Previous Years

### Q1. Consider the following statements regarding the earliest Palaeolithic tools: [UPSC]
1. The beginning of the use of tools by humans has been a unique phenomenon and may be said to have laid the foundation for the science of the use of tools and machines to aid humans in their various endeavours.
2. The regular use of tools, beginning 2.6 million years ago in East Africa, is well attested and accompanies many earlier and later hominid fossils.
3. In India, no human fossils have been found associated with Stone Age tools, but we do have some idea of the antiquity of tools from geological datings.

Which of the following statement(s) is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 2 only
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- **(d) All of the above** ✓
> **Explanation:** The beginning of the use of tools by the humans has been a unique phenomenon and may be said to have laid the foundation of science of use of tools and machines for the aid of humans in their various endeavours. The regular use of tools, beginning 2.6 million years ago in East Africa, is well attested and accompanies many earlier and later hominid fossils.

### Q2. Which of the following pairs is correctly matched? [UPSC]
- (a) Lower Palaeolithic - Tools made on flakes and blades
- (b) Middle Palaeolithic - Tools made on flakes
- (c) Upper Palaeolithic - Handaxe and cleaver industries
- **(d) All of the above** ✓

### Q3. Which of the following belongs to the Lower Palaeolithic cultures? [UPSC CDS]
- (a) Belan Valley
- (b) Pahalgam
- (c) Bhimbetka
- **(d) All of the above** ✓

### Q4. Which of the following archaeological sites has evidence of pit-dwellings? [SSC]
- (a) Burzahom
- (b) Mehrgarh
- (c) Rakh-Dhandi
- (d) Thavvy

### Q5. The rock paintings found at Bhimbetka generally belong to which of the following periods? [SSC]
- (a) Palaeolithic
- **(b) Mesolithic** ✓
- (c) Microlothic
- (d) Neolithic

### Q6. Consider the following information: [UPSC]

| Archaeological Site | State | Description |
|---|---|---|
| 1. Chandraketu-garh | Odisha | Trading port town |
| 2. Inamgaon | Maharashtra | Chalcolithic site |
| 3. Mangadu | Kerala | Megalithic site |
| 4. Salihundam | Andhra Pradesh | Rock-cut cave shrines |

Which of the above rows is the given information correctly matched?
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- **(b) 2 and 3 only** ✓
- (c) 3 and 4 only
- (d) 1 and 4 only
