---
subject: "History NCERT"
class: 6
chapter: 12
title: "Buildings, Paintings and Books"
---

## Level 01 | Moderate

### Q1. In which city is the iron pillar of Mehrauli located?
- (a) Bihar
- (b) Mathura
- **(c) Delhi** ✓
- (d) Chandigarh
> **Explanation:** The iron pillar of Delhi is a structure 23 feet 8 inches high with a 16-inch diameter that was constructed by Chandragupta II and now stands in the Qutb complex at Mehrauli in Delhi, India. It is famous for the rust-resistant composition of the metals used in its construction.

### Q2. What do you mean by the word stupa?
- **(a) Mound** ✓
- (b) Round
- (c) Tall
- (d) Short
> **Explanation:** The word 'Stupa' means a mound. It is a Buddhist religious building containing the relics of Buddha and his disciples. It is used as a place of meditation. A related architectural term is a chaitya, which is a prayer hall or temple containing a stupa.

### Q3. Who are the god and goddess whose statues are worshipped in Temples?
- **(a) Shiva, Vishnu and Durga** ✓
- (b) Indira and Agni
- (c) All of these
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** During this period, some of the earliest Hindu temples were also built. Deities such as Vishnu, Shiva and Durga were worshipped in these shrines. The most important part of the temple was the room known as the garbhagriha, where the image of the chief deity was placed.

### Q4. Who was the author of Silappadikaram?
- (a) Guru Ram Das
- (b) Banabhatta
- (c) Kalidasa
- **(d) Ilango** ✓
> **Explanation:** A famous Tamil epic, the Silappadikaram, was composed by a poet named Ilango, around 1,800 years ago. It is the story of a merchant named Kovalan, who lived in Puhar and fell in love with a courtesan named Madhavi, neglecting his wife Kannagi.

### Q5. The poem Meghaduta was written by
- (a) Tulsidas
- **(b) Kalidasa** ✓
- (c) Bhavabhuti
- (d) Harsha
> **Explanation:** Meghaduta is a lyrical poem written by Kalidasa (c. 4th-5th century CE), considered to be one of the greatest Sanskrit poets. Kalidasa was a Classical Sanskrit author who is often considered plays and poetry are primarily based on the Vedas, the Ramayana, the Mahabharata and the Puranas.

### Q6. In which language were the Puranas written?
- (a) Hindi
- (b) Tamil
- **(c) Sanskrit** ✓
- (d) English
> **Explanation:** The Puranas are known for the intricate layers of symbolism depicted within their stories. Composed originally in Sanskrit, its translations in other Indian languages are named after major Hindu deities such as Vishnu, Shiva, Brahma and Shakti.

### Q7. Mahabharata war was fought during:
- **(a) 900 BC** ✓
- (b) 800 BC
- (c) 700 BC
- (d) 600 BC
> **Explanation:** Mahabharata war was fought during 900 BC. The Kurukshetra War, also called the Mahabharata War, is a war described in the Indian epic poem The Mahabharata. It is about the conflict over dynastic succession between two groups of cousins, the Kauravas and the Pandavas, for the throne of Hastinapura.

### Q8. What was the capital of Kosala?
- (a) Hastinapur
- **(b) Sravasti** ✓
- (c) Kamal
- (d) Delhi
> **Explanation:** The Ramayana is about Rama, a prince of Kosala, who is sent into exile. His wife Sita is abducted by the king of Lanka, named Ravana, and Rama has to fight a battle to get her back. Valmiki is the author of the Sanskrit Ramayana.

### Q9. The famous monolithic temples of Mahabalipuram are called ___
- **(a) Pancha Rathas** ✓
- (b) Dargahs
- (c) Cave temples
- (d) Shore temple
> **Explanation:** Pancha Rathas is a monument complex at Mahabalipuram on the Coromandel Coast of the Bay of Bengal, in the Kancheepuram district of Tamil Nadu, India. Pancha Rathas is an example of monolithic Indian rock-cut architecture.

### Q10. In which of the following temples can the pyramidal roof be found?
- (a) Dasavatar Temple
- (b) Shiva Temple of Bhumara
- **(c) Bhitargaon temple** ✓
- (d) Shiva Temple of Koh
> **Explanation:** The temple at Bhitargaon in Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh) is one of the earliest surviving brick temples of Gupta India. It was built in the 5th century AD during the Gupta Empire. It is the oldest remaining terracotta Hindu shrine with a roof and a high Shikhara (spire) which paved the way for elaborate Nagara style of temple architecture in North India.

### Q11. Name the hall where people could assemble.
- **(a) Mandapa** ✓
- (b) Shikharas
- (c) Garbhagriha
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** Mandapa: A place in temples where people could assemble. Mandapa (also spelled mantapa or mandapam) in Indian architecture, especially Hindu temple architecture, is a pillared hall or pavilion for public rituals. Mandapas are described as "open" or "closed" depending on whether they have walls. In temples, one or more mandapas very often lie between the sanctuary temple and the temple entrance, on the same axis. In a large temple, other mandapas may be placed to the sides or detached within the temple compound.

### Q12. Devotees walked around the stupa in a ___
- (a) Straight direction
- (b) Semi-clockwise direction
- **(c) Clockwise direction** ✓
- (d) Anti-clockwise direction
> **Explanation:** A path, known as the pradakshina patha, was laid around the stupa, surrounded with railings. The entrance of the path was through gateways. Devotees walked around the stupa, in a clockwise direction, as a mark of devotion. Both railings and gateways were often decorated with sculptures.

### Q13. Who was Aryabhatta?
- **(a) Mathematician** ✓
- (b) Zoologist
- (c) Archaeologist
- (d) None of these
> **Explanation:** Aryabhatta was a mathematician and an astronomer.

### Q14. In which language Aryabhata wrote the book Aryabhatiyam?
- (a) Hindi
- **(b) Sanskrit** ✓
- (c) Pali
- (d) Tamil
> **Explanation:** Aryabhatta, a mathematician and astronomer, wrote a book in Sanskrit known as the Aryabhatiyam.

## Level 02 | Advanced

### Q1. In the context of stupas, which of the following statements is not correct?
- (a) The word 'Stupa' means a mound.
- **(b) A small box placed at the centre or heart of the stupa was known as a Metal Casket.** ✓
- (c) Often, a path, known as the Pradakshina Patha, was laid around the stupa.
- (d) The Pradakshina Patha was surrounded with railings, known as 'Vedika'.
> **Explanation:** The word 'Stupa' means a mound. Generally, there is a small box placed at the heart of the stupa. This may contain bodily remains (such as teeth, bone or ashes) of the Buddha or his followers, or things they used, as well as precious stones and coins. This box, known as a Relic Casket, was covered with earth. Later, a layer of mud brick or baked brick was used on top. And then, the dome like stone structure was sometimes covered with carved stone slabs.

### Q2. In the context of pre-medieval early Hindu temples, consider the following statements:
1. The most important part of the temple was Mandapa.
2. Most temples also had a space known as the Garbhagriha. It was a hall where people could assemble.
3. Often, a tower, known as the Shikhara, was built on top of the temple.

How many of the above statements is/are correct?
- (a) Only one
- **(b) Only two** ✓
- (c) All three
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** The most important part of the temple was the room known as the garbhagriha, where the image of the chief deity was placed. It was here that priests performed religious rituals and devotees offered worship to the deity. Hence, Statements 1 and 2 are not correct. Most temples also had a space known as the mandapa. It was a hall where people could assemble. Often, as at Bhitargaon, a tower, known as the shikhara, was built on top of the garbhagriha, to mark this out as a sacred place. Building shikharas required careful planning. Hence, Statement 3 is correct.

### Q3. In the context of Puranas, which of the following statements is not correct?
- (a) The Puranas were recited in temples by priests and kings along with prayer rituals.
- (b) They contain stories about the creation of the world.
- (c) The Puranas were written in simple Sanskrit verse and were meant to be heard by everybody.
- **(d) Women and Shudras who were not allowed to study the Vedas, could also not listen to the Puranas.** ✓
> **Explanation:** Statements (a), (b) and (c) are correct but (d) is not correct because the Puranas were written in simple Sanskrit verse and were meant to be heard by everybody, including women and shudras, who were not allowed to study the Vedas.

### Q4. Which of the following is not concerned with the compilation of Puranas?
- (a) Vyasa
- **(b) Mankhak** ✓
- (c) Lomharsh
- (d) Ugrasrava
> **Explanation:** The total number of Puranas is 18, but earlier, according to Matsya Purana; there was only one Purana and all other forms had originated from it. According to the Brahmin Purana, the Puranas are supposed to have been compiled by Vyasa. Vishnu Purana shows that Vyasa gave his Purana Samhita to his disciple Lomharsh. Ugrasrava was Lomharsh's son. He was also associated with the compilation of Puranas. Mankhak was a great Sanskrit poet of Kashmir. His famous compositions are 'Shree Kantha charit mahakavya' and 'Mankhakosh'. Mahabharata was compiled by 'Vyasa', one of the compilators of Puranas. The writing work of the Mahabharata used 1,500 years ago.

### Q5. The author of Aryabhatiyam, Aryabhatta belongs to which of the following subjects:
1. Astrology
2. Astronomy
3. Mathematics

Select the correct answer with the help given below:
- (a) 1 only
- (b) 1 and 3 only
- (c) 1 and 2 only
- **(d) 2 and 3** ✓
> **Explanation:** Aryabhatta, a mathematician and astronomer, wrote a book in Sanskrit known as the Aryabhatiyam. He stated that day and night were caused by the rotation of the earth on its axis, even though it seems as if the sun is rising and setting everyday. He developed a scientific explanation for eclipses as well. He also found a way of calculating the circumference of a circle, which is nearly as accurate as the formula we use today.

### Q6. In the context of zero, consider the following statements:
1. Indian mathematicians invented a special symbol for zero.
2. This system of counting was first adapted by Europeans and then spread to the whole of Arabia.
3. The Romans used a system of counting without using zero.

Which of the statements given above is/are correct?
- (a) 1 only
- **(b) 1 and 3 only** ✓
- (c) 2 and 3 only
- (d) 1, 2 and 3 only
> **Explanation:** Statements 1 and 3 are correct because this system of counting was adapted by the Arabs and then spread to Europe. It continues to be in use throughout the world.

### Q7. Consider the following epics and their authors:
List 1 — List 2
A. Silappadikaram — 1. Valmiki
B. Manimekalai — 2. Sattanar
C. Meghaduta — 3. Kalidasa
D. Ramayana — 4. Ilango

How many of the above pairs is/are incorrect?
- (a) Only one
- **(b) Only two** ✓
- (c) All three
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** Epics are grand, long compositions, about heroic men and women and include stories about gods. A famous Tamil epic, the Silappadikaram, was composed by a poet named Ilango, around 1,800 years ago. It is the story of a merchant named Kovalan, who lived in Puhar and fell in love with a courtesan named Madhavi, neglecting his wife Kannagi. Another Tamil epic, the Manimekalai was composed by Sattanar around 1,400 years ago. This describes the story of the daughter of Kovalan and Madhavi. Meghaduta is one of Kalidasa's best-known poems; in which a monsoon cloud is imagined to be a messenger between lovers who are separated from one another. Valmiki is recognised as the author of the Sanskrit Ramayana. The Ramayana is about Rama, a prince of Kosala, who was sent into exile.

### Q8. Some of the earliest Hindu temples had a hall where people could assemble. This place was known as:
- (a) Pradakshina patha
- **(b) Mandapa** ✓
- (c) Grama bhojaka
- (d) Garbhagriha
> **Explanation:** At Bhitargaon, a tower known as the shikhara was built on top of the temple. Most temples also had a space known as the mandapa, a hall where people could assemble.

### Q9. Assertion(A): Ancient Indian metallurgy made major contributions to the metallurgical history of the world.
Reason(R): Archaeological excavations have shown that the Harappans were master craftsmen and had knowledge of copper metallurgy.
- **(a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.** ✓
- (b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
- (c) A is true, but R is false.
- (d) A is false, but R is true
> **Explanation:** Ancient Indian metallurgists made major contributions to the metallurgical history of the world. Archaeological excavations have shown that the Harappans were master craftsmen and had knowledge of copper metallurgy. They even manufactured bronze by mixing copper and tin. While the Harappans belonged to the Bronze Age, their successors belonged to the Iron Age. India produced highly advanced types of iron-forged iron, wrought iron and cast iron.

## Level 03 | Previous Years

### Q1. Which one of the following statements is correct? [UPSC]
- **(a) Ajanta Caves lie in the gorge of the Waghora River.** ✓
- (b) Sanchi Stupa lies in the gorge of the Waghora River.
- (c) Pandav Leni (Pandu Lena) cave shrines lie in the gorge of the Narmada River.
- (d) Amaravati Stupa lies in the gorge of the Godavari River.
> **Explanation:** The Ajanta Caves lie in the gorge of the Waghora River. Ajanta groups of caves, a World Heritage Site, overlooks a narrow sinuous gorge, through which flows the stream of Waghora. The river is descended from the head of the Cave 28 from a waterfall of seven leaps. Waghore means 'tiger river' in Marathi.

### Q2. Building 'Kalyana Mandapas' were a notable feature in the temple construction in the kingdom of: [UPSC]
- (a) Chalukya
- (b) Chandela
- (c) Rashtrakuta
- **(d) Vijayanagara** ✓
> **Explanation:** Kalyana Mandapas were dedicated to ritual marriage celebration of the Lord with the Goddess. Vijayanagara or "City of victory" was the name of both a city and an empire. The empire was founded in the fourteenth century (1336 AD) by Harihara and Bukka of the Sangama dynasty. They made Hampi the capital city. In 1986, Hampi was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. It stretched from the river Krishna in the north to the extreme south of the peninsula.

### Q3. What is/are common to the two historical places, Ajanta and Mahabalipuram? [UPSC]
1. Both were built in the same period.
2. Both belong to the same religious denomination.
3. Both have rock-cut monuments.

Select the correct answer using the code given below.
- (a) 1 and 2 only
- **(b) 3 only** ✓
- (c) 1 and 3 only
- (d) None of the statements given above is correct
> **Explanation:** Both are rock-cut monuments because cave-cut Chaityas, Viharas and Stupas are found in Ajanta. Hence Statement 3 is correct.

### Q4. With reference to the art and archaeological history of India, which one among the following was made earliest? [UPSC]
- (a) Lingaraja Temple at Bhubaneswar
- **(b) Rock-cut elephant at Dhauli** ✓
- (c) Rock-cut monuments at Mahabalipuram
- (d) Varaha image at Udayagiri
> **Explanation:** The correct answer is the Rock-cut elephant at Dhauli. The rock-cut Elephant at Dhauli was created during Ashoka's reign (272–231 BC). The Lingaraja Temple was built by King Lalatendu Keshari in the 11th century. The group of monuments at Mahabalipuram is a collection of 7th and 8th century CE religious monuments in the coastal resort town of Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu. Probable image of Chandragupta II, paying homage to Varaha, the avatar of Vishnu, is in the Udayagiri Caves (Cave 5), circa 400 CE.

### Q5. Kalamkari painting refers to [BARC UDC]
- **(a) A hand-painted cotton textile produced in South India** ✓
- (b) A handmade drawing on bamboo handicrafts in North-East India
- (c) A block-painted woollen cloth in the Western Himalayan region of India
- (d) A hand-painted decorative silk cloth in North-Western India
> **Explanation:** Kalamkari is a type of hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile produced in India. It is made in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. Only natural dyes are used in Kalamkari, which involves twenty-three steps. To create design contours, artists use a bamboo or date palm stick pointed at one end with a bundle of fine hair attached to this pointed end, serving as the brush or pen.

### Q6. Consider the following historical places: [UPSC]
1. Ajanta Caves
2. Lepakshi Temple
3. Sanchi Stupa

Which of the above places is/are known for mural paintings?
- (a) 1 only
- **(b) 1 and 2 only** ✓
- (c) 1, 2 and 3
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** A mural, a painting applied to and made integral with the surface of a wall or ceiling. The term may properly include painting on fired tiles but ordinarily does not refer to mosaic decoration unless the mosaic forms part of the overall scheme of the painting. Lepakshi paintings are the mural paintings, located in the Anantapur district of Andhra Pradesh. Indian Mural Paintings are paintings made on walls of caves and palaces. These pieces of art are symbolic of the life, culture and traditions of the people of those periods. The paintings on the caves of Ajanta, Ellora, Elephanta and also on the Bagh caves and Sittanvasal are vivid reminders of great art that flourished centuries ago. Ajanta paintings at Aurangabad are extremely renowned for its Buddhist paintings. The paintings have large typological variance, clear lines, rhythmic movements and merging designs. Paintings of Vajrapani, Avalokiteshwara, apsaras are famous.

### Q7. With reference to ancient India, consider the following statements: [UPSC]
1. The concept of stupa is Buddhist in origin.
2. Stupa was generally a repository of relics.
3. Stupa was a votive and commemorative structure in Buddhist tradition.

How many of the statements given above are correct?
- (a) Only one
- **(b) Only two** ✓
- (c) All three
- (d) None
> **Explanation:** Statement 1 is incorrect: Stupa is a pre-Buddhist tumuli in which sramanas were buried in a seated position called chaitya. The term "stupa" comes from the Sanskrit word "stu-pa", which means "heap" or "pile." Originally, stupas were simple mounds of earth or stones that served as commemorative markers for important events or burial sites. Statement 2 is correct: One of the primary functions of a stupa is to serve as a repository of relics. Relics are objects associated with the Buddha, such as his physical remains, personal belongings or items used by him. They are considered sacred and hold great spiritual significance in Buddhism. Statement 3 is correct: Stupas are also associated with votive and commemorative purposes. Stupas are often built as acts of devotion and as offerings to the Buddha or other enlightened beings. Stupas are also constructed to commemorate significant events, individuals or historical sites. For example, stupas might be built to mark the birthplace, enlightenment site or the site of the Buddha's parinirvana (passing away).
